.\" (c) Copyright 2022 Richard W. Marinelli    Ver. 1.0.0
.\"
.\" This work is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPLv3).  To view a copy of this license, see the
.\" "License.txt" file included with this distribution or visit http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html.
.\"
.ad l
.TH XGREP 1 2022-11-08 "Ver. 1.0" "Xgrep Documentation"
.nh \" Turn off hyphenation.
.SH "NAME"
\fBxgrep\fR \- regular expression search utility.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBxgrep\fR
.in +.7i
.sp -1v
{\fB\-?\fR, \fB\-usage\fR | \fB\-C\fR, \fB\-copyright\fR | \fB\-help\fR | \fB\-V\fR, \fB\-version\fR}
.in
.sp +0v
\fBxgrep\fR
.in +.7i
.sp -1v
[\fB\-0\fR] [\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-count\fR] [\fB\-E\fR, \fB\-no\-enhanced\fR] [\fB\-e\fR \fIp\fR] [\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-force-hdr\fR] \c
[\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-no-hdr\fR] [\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-ignore-case\fR] [\fB\-L\fR, \fB\-lit\fR] [\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-only-filename\fR] \c
[\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-max-matches\fR \fIn\fR] [\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-line-num\fR] [\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-only-matching\fR] \c
[\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-pat\fR \fIp\fR] [\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-quiet\fR] [\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-skip\fR] [\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-invert-match\fR] \c
[\fIpat\fR] [\fIfile\fR ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBxgrep\fR is a fast file\-searching utility that uses the regular expression engine from the XRE Library for
regular expression pattern matching and the Boyer-Moore engine from the CXL Library for plain text pattern
matching.  It selects lines in text files that match one or more patterns (or do not match any of the
patterns) and writes them to standard output.  Multiple patterns and files may be specified.  A line in a file
is considered a match if at least one pattern matches the line without its newline terminator.
.PP
The search engine to use for a particular pattern is determined automatically.  If the \-lit switch is specified
or a pattern is entirely literal text, the Boyer-Moore engine is used; otherwise, the XRE engine is used.  (See xre_format(7)
for a description of the regular expression syntax.)
.PP
Note that capturing groups may be specified in a regular expression pattern and used for back-reference matching, but
they will have no effect on the output format.
.SH SWITCHES
.IP "\fB\-0\fR" 4
Read list of filenames to search from standard input, separated by null characters, instead of from the
command line.  Switch is expected to be used in concert with the \-print0 switch of find(1).
.IP "\fB\-?\fR, \fB\-usage\fR" 4
Display usage and exit.
.IP "\fB\-C\fR, \fB\-copyright\fR" 4
Display copyright information and exit.
.IP "\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-count\fR" 4
Display count of selected lines only.
.IP "\fB\-E\fR, \fB\-no-enhanced\fR" 4
Disable enhanced features in search patterns, otherwise, enable.
.IP "\fB\-e\fR \fIp\fR" 4
Alias for \-pat switch.  Switch may be repeated.
.IP "\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-force-hdr\fR" 4
Always print filename header with output lines.
.IP "\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-no-hdr\fR" 4
Suppress printing of filename header with output lines.
.IP "\fB\-help\fR" 4
Display detailed help and exit.
.IP "\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-ignore-case\fR" 4
Perform case-insensitive matching, otherwise, case-sensitive.
.IP "\fB\-L\fR, \fB\-lit\fR" 4
Interpret patterns as literal text instead of regular expressions.
.IP "\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-only-filename\fR" 4
Display names of files containing selected lines only.
.IP "\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-max-matches\fR \fIn\fR" 4
Stop scanning each file after \fIn\fR matches are found.
.IP "\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-line-num\fR" 4
Precede each selected line by its line number.
.IP "\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-only-matching\fR" 4
Display only the matching portion of the lines.
.IP "\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-pat\fR \fIp\fR" 4
Use pattern \fIp\fR for searching.  Switch may be repeated.
.IP "\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-quiet\fR" 4
Quiet mode: suppress normal output.  Scanning stops when first match is found.
.IP "\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-skip\fR" 4
Skip files that cannot be opened (ignore errors).
.IP "\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-version\fR" 4
Display program version and exit.
.IP "\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-invert-match\fR" 4
Select lines not matching any of the patterns.
.SH ARGUMENTS
The following optional arguments may be specified:
.IP \fIpat\fR 8
Pattern to use for searching.
.IP \fIfile\fR 8
Zero or more input files.  If no files are specified, data is read from standard input.  Alternatively,
if any file is specified as "\-", standard input is read for that file.
.SH NOTES
Either a \fB\-pat\fR switch or \fIpat\fR argument must be specified.  If the former, the \fIpat\fR
argument must be omitted.
.PP
The \fB\-line\-num\fR and \fB\-only\-matching\fR switches are ignored if the \fB\-count\fR, \fB\-only\-filename\fR,
or \fB\-quiet\fR switch is specified.
.SH EXAMPLES
To find all occurrences of the word "verbose" in a file:
.sp
.nf
.RS 4
$ xgrep 'verbose' myfile
.RE
.fi
.PP
To find all lines in two files which do not contain the words "foo" or "bar":
.sp
.nf
.RS 4
$ xgrep -v -p 'foo' -p 'bar' myfile1 myfile2
.sp
.RE
.fi
.PP
To list all C source files in a project containing function "myfunc":
.sp
.nf
.RS 4
$ find myproj -name '*.c' -print0 | xgrep -0 -l -L 'myfunc('
.RE
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
The \fBxgrep\fR utility exits with one of the following values:
.IP "0" 6
One or more lines were selected.
.IP "1" 6
No lines were selected.
.IP "2" 6
An error occurred.
.SH SEE ALSO
find(1), sed(1), xre_format(7)
.SH AUTHOR
\fBxgrep\fR was written and is currently maintained by Richard W. Marinelli <italian389@yahoo.com>.  See
the -version and -copyright switches for version and copyright information.
